Minutes 2022-03-09 (#291)
solid/authorization-panel: meetings/2022-03-09.md

* If this is your first time, welcome! please introduce yourself.

### Scribes
* elf
* Matthieu

### Introductions
* Kushal Das: New to the Solid project. I spent my life with different open source projects. Mostly Python core. Currently working in Sweden helping different gov departments implement Solid. Focusing on privacy and creating better applications. Also evaluating future server implementation in Python. I'm helping a team member to have IdP server running. Still struggling with reading so many specs.
* Matthieu: Excited about possible Python implementation. If you have any question about ACP spec don't hesitate to ping me on gitter.

---

## Topics

### Actions from last week

* Matthieu to create an issue on the authorization panel to make the `acp:client` property closed by default.
* Matthieu to create an issue on the authorization panel to make all ACP matcher properties closed by default (and potentially raise it as a general authz issue affecting both the ACP and ACL ontologies).

>   * Matthieu: will do it after this meeting.

Author: ```suggestion
  * Matthieu: will do it after this meeting. See [issue 292](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/292).
```

* Elf to create an issue about the requirement to not disclose a trusted issuer publicly in the Solid-OIDC panel and raise it in the panel on Monday the 7th.
  * https://github.com/solid/solid-oidc/issues/92
* Elf to write an issue for a VC use case showing the responsibility of the UMA AS.
  * https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/discussions/290

### New person perspective

> * Elf: What does the current state of WAC/ACP seems for someone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: What does the current state of WAC/ACP seem to be, for someone new?
```

> * Kushal: I only learned about semantic data late 2015. When I started reading the specs, I found it a bit overwhelmed and had to go back to the fundamentals. It's a little bit confusing to get to understand the different parts of the Solid ecosystem. As a beginner even though I'm writing code for many years, it's difficult getting into it. The examples really help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Kushal: I only learned about semantic data late 2015. When I started reading the specs, I found it a bit overwhelming and had to go back to the fundamentals. It's a little bit confusing to get to understand the different parts of the Solid ecosystem. As a Solid beginner, even though I'm writing code for many years, it's difficult getting into it. The examples really help.
```

* Elf: Some specs have primers (for example Solid OIDC). We're trying as editors to make them available.

> * Matthieu: There is no primer for ACP, I'll try to write one up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: There is no primer for ACP; I'll try to write one up.
```

* Kushal: Personally I try to write my questions in [my blog](https://kushaldas.in/posts/solid-project-webid-and-privacy.html).

> * ...: I was wondering why the Authorization server and the resource server have to be separate is one of my questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ...: One of my questions is, why do the Authorization server and the resource server have to be separate?
```

* ...: This comes more from an implementation point of view. Generally, people don't have to separate it. But I'll come back to this after reading more about it.
* Elf: It's regular OAuth implementation to separate authz and resource server. Also, while this is described separately, some implementations can choose to combine those roles.

### Responsibility of the UMA AS and ACP engine in VC checking

URL: https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/discussions/290

* Elf: It's a rough example relying on an existing use case (see [discussion on the authorization repo](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/discussions/290)).

> * Wouter: Very interesting. Why would the UMA server need to access the ACL? Couldn't the VC Type be passed along by the server in the ticket (I'd like to keep things decoupled).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wouter: Very interesting. Why would the UMA server need to access the ACL? Couldn't the VC Type be passed along by the server in the ticket? (I'd like to keep things decoupled.)
```

> * Elf: I think that the AS knows the policy, from the client's perspective, it doesn't matter. I think it's between the RS and AS that the discovery happens. Some kind of a JWT might be used. It would be nice to decouple AS and RS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: I think that the AS knows the policy; from the client's perspective, it doesn't matter. I think it's between the RS and AS that the discovery happens. Some kind of a JWT might be used. It would be nice to decouple AS and RS.
```

* Wouter: I think I'm pretty confident in the fact that we can decouple AS from RS. I'm more concerned whether we can decouple the UMA server (exchange info for an access token) from the role of syncing the grant to an ACL.

> * Elf: I see, if we have this kind of claim negociation (if the AS responds to required claims), the AS needs to know which claims are required. Also, what is the single source of truth? Is it on the resource server? Some policies would apply accross multiple resources/resource servers. I think we need to work a bit more on where the policies are stored and how they're accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: I see, if we have this kind of claim negotiation (if the AS responds to required claims), the AS needs to know which claims are required. Also, what is the single source of truth? Is it on the resource server? Some policies would apply across multiple resources/resource servers. I think we need to work a bit more on where the policies are stored and how they're accessed.
```

* Wouter: I think it does make sense but I'm not sure we're talking about exactly the same thing. I think grants are pretty clearly the domain of the authorization agents. There should be also some server delivering access tokens based on permissions. But if we take the grants delivered by the authz agent, if they are the single source of truth (thereby being source of truth for more than one resource), then there needs to be a way to sync that truth with/in the Solid ACL auxiliary resources. Does the server performing that sync needs to be the same server as this UMA server (which needs a lot less informations and permissions than the server that needs to perform the sync).
* Matthieu: By UMA, you mean AS?

> * Wouter: I think what we understand to be AS is a single entity that has two roles 1. deliver an Access Token (by pushing VCs or exchanging an ID token) which only requires knowledge of the UMA ticket 2. syncing the grants set by the authorization agent onto the resources (needs a lot of permissions or implicit trust).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wouter: I think what we understand to be AS is a single entity that has two roles: 1. delivering an Access Token (by pushing VCs or exchanging an ID token) which only requires knowledge of the UMA ticket; 2. syncing the grants set by the authorization agent onto the resources (needs a lot of permissions or implicit trust).
```

* Matthieu: I'm not sure about syncing Data Grants into auxiliary ACL resources or on tight coupling every authz scenario to an Authorization Agent. I don't think those two would translate well. I don't see them as mutually exclusive.

> * Wouter: But than we need to find a way to decide which one has priority. Which one acts as the source of truth. If there is an ACL stating that X doesn't have access to a resource yet I'm an owner and i issue a data grant that X has access. What's the truth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wouter: But then we need to find a way to decide which one has priority, which one acts as the source of truth. If there is an ACL stating that X doesn't have access to a resource yet I'm an owner and i issue a data grant that X has access, what's the truth?
```

> * Elf: I agree that we need to agree on what is the single source of truth. Probably ACP/WAC/ACL could not necessarily cohabit with data grants. Myself I think that some storage type would only work with data grants. Specifically if pushing a claim could resolve in changing an ACL on the AS. What if you used a notification stream to get the AS updating the ACL?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: I agree that we need to agree on what is the single source of truth. Probably ACP/WAC/ACL could not necessarily cohabit with data grants. Myself, I think that some storage type would only work with data grants. Specifically if pushing a claim could resolve in changing an ACL on the AS. What if you used a notification stream to get the AS updating the ACL?
```

* Matthieu: What kind of claim are you talking about?
* Elf: The client is pushing claims. If we don't have an out of band way to propagate delegation, for the client to get any access, they'd need to present a verifiable credential that proves a user authorized that client to have access. If the end user of the client is not the resource owner, they would issue a delegated data grant. Before that claim, no one would know that the user has authorized a client. That would be reflected in updating the ACL on that server.
* ...: If it's happening out of band via the authz agent, client wouldn't need to push it as a claim
* Matthieu: This whole thread is quite confusing.
* Wouter: Yes, I think it's a lot of inter-mixed decisions or a lot of different aspects that influence each other.

> * Elf: We have a use case about permissioning applications. The end user is not the resource owner and wants to access and authorise a client. How currently would you resolve that use case with raw ACP? Say the end user only gets read/write from the ACL but it's client.

Reviewer: @elf-pavlik -- `Say the end user only gets read/write from the ACL but it's client.` doesn't make enough sense for me to correct.

Author: ```suggestion
* Elf: We have a use case about permissioning applications. The end user is not the resource owner and wants to access and authorise a client. How currently would you resolve that use case with raw ACP? Say the end user gets read/write from the ACL but its client only gets read.
```

* Matthieu: Resource owner has control over ACL and can do as they please.

> * Matthieu: How can I allow a client to gain access to a resource I have only read-write access to if I don't control the resource?

Author: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: So your question is: How can I allow a client to gain access to a resource I have only read-write access to if I don't control the resource?
```

* ...: That's typically a delegated access use-case.
* Elf: yes, more like a typical OAuth End user delegates access to an application.

> * Matthieu: Currently in Solid we are thinking of access to resources depending on 3 independent actors all potentially restricted at the resource level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: Currently, in Solid, we are thinking of access to resources depending on 3 independent actors, all potentially restricted at the resource level.
```

  * 1. agent - who can also restrict which client and issuer can be used to gain specific access modes.
  * 2. client.
  * 3. issuer.
* Elf: agent would be the end-user using the client?
* Matthieu: there could be cases where there is not per say a client, say when you access a resource programatically or via the browser.

> * Elf: In that case (browser) the Solid storage/RS would act as a OAuth client. You'd still have a client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: In that case (browser), the Solid storage/RS would act as a OAuth client. You'd still have a client.
```

* Matthieu: How does that work with curl?
* Elf: Then curl is your client.
* Matthieu: How do you uniquely identify those?

> * Elf: You could use client credentials and register the client with your OP and curl would act as that client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: You could use client credentials and register the client with your OP, and curl would act as that client.
```

> * Matthieu: And typically client credentials flow doesn't issue uniquely identifiable client ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: And typically client credential flow doesn't issue uniquely identifiable client ID.
```

* Elf: Yes, but even if it's not globally unique (we might still mandate it to be an IRI), even if not dereferenceable as a client ID. But the client would be user-bound. For Solid-OIDC, the client registration would bound the client credentials to a specific user. So the ID Token would have a specific WebID. We still need to define client credentials flow in Solid-OIDC.

> * Wouter: I pretty much agree that there always would be a client. The bigger question is is there always an agent or clients can act on their own behalf. I know that Pavlik believes there always will be agent/user. Which still doesn't answer delegation issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wouter: I pretty much agree that there always would be a client. The bigger question is whether there is always an intermediary agent, i.e., whether clients can act on their own behalf. I know that Pavlik believes there always will be agent/user. Which still doesn't answer delegation issue.
```

* Pavlik: To clarify I think we always need agent/user, on whose behalf the application is acting. Mostly for any legal policies being applied to that user, software can't bare legal consequences.
* Matthieu: I think it would be good to look at delegation issue independently from issue of syncing policies to ACL auxiliary resources.

> * Wouter: I think at one point we said that it will be hard to sync Data Grants with structure of ACL for example. At other point we said we would need UMA server to accept data grants as claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wouter: I think that at one point, we said that it will be hard to sync Data Grants with structure of ACL for example. At another point, we said we would need UMA server to accept data grants as claims.
```

> * Elf: I'd see one of the ways to address delegation is to have push Data Grant as VC which an be verified as AC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: I'd see one of the ways to address delegation is to push Data Grant as VC which can be verified as AC.
```

* Wouter: I would rather first push the data grant VC to some server only responsible for access control resources based on data grants.

> * Elf: In a way the syncing server would still need a way to push claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: In a way, the syncing server would still need a way to push claims.
```

> * Matthieu: From VC perspective, there can be any number of VC issuer. What I care about as an authorization server, which is aware of how to read ACL auxiliary resources, and interpret ACP. All I need to know that I will be granting access to anyone presenting VC of a specific type. Or maybe granting access to someone specifically presenting vc of certain type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: From VC perspective, there can be any number of VC issuers. What I care about as an authorization server, which is aware of how to read ACL auxiliary resources, and interpret ACP. All I need to know is that I will be granting access to anyone presenting VC of a specific type. Or maybe granting access to someone specifically presenting VC of certain type.
```

> * Elf: Where do you see client being presenting VC to?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: Where do you see client presenting VC to?
```

* Matthieu: Client would present it to AS, it would show VP to AS.
* Elf: We currently leave the AS - RS coordination up to implementation.

> * Matthieu: No spec can rely of other spec implementing a translation layer for it to work. There need to be clear boundaries between specs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: No spec can rely on other spec implementing a translation layer for it to work. There need to be clear boundaries between specs.
```

> * Wouter: If Data Grans can be pushed to AS (as claims), but they are not meant to be translated to ACL auxiliary resources. That means that either Data Grant has final word or there even is no ACL resource behind it. Since they may conflict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Wouter: If Data Grants can be pushed to AS (as claims), but they are not meant to be translated to ACL auxiliary resources, that means that either Data Grant has final word or there is no ACL resource behind it, since they may conflict.
```

* Matthieu: We have this case where agents restrict which issuer asserts their identity and maybe in the future which client can be used with their WebID. The access modes are the intersection of what is mandated by both the WebID restriction and what is in ACL resource. ACL could also accept data grants of certain type.
* Elf: The RS would then also need to understand Data Grants?
* Matthieu: All the RS cares about is seeing a valid Access token to acces a resource.
* Elf: Where does the resolution of ACLs happens?
* Matthieu: On the AS.
* Elf: Say for a creator, you need a context.
* Matthieu: The RS sends the context to the AS. Context being the description of a request.
* Elf: ACP requires that inherited policies be copied in the contained resources ACLs.

> * Matthieu: It is not exactly correct, in contained resource you just need to add statement saying that member access control is applying as access control. So you materialize it as one statement. If you want to remove it you need to remove it where it is being inherited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: It is not exactly correct. In contained resource, you just need to add statement saying that member access control is applying as access control. So you materialize it as one statement. If you want to remove it, you need to remove it where it is being inherited.
```

* Elf: RS or AS is adding this statement.

> * Matthieu: Auxiliary ACL resource could be kept on AS or the RS but the AS needs to validate writing any ACL to remain consistent. There needs to be a trust relationship between the AS and RS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matthieu: Auxiliary ACL resource could be kept on AS or RS, but the AS needs to validate writing any ACL to remain consistent. There needs to be a trust relationship between the AS and RS.
```

* Elf: I was under the impression that the RS is responsible for the lifecycle of auxiliary resources.
* Matthieu: Yes, because the lifecycle of ACL is not different from the life cycle of the resource itself.

> * Elf: But then if you host it on AS how do you deal with the lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Elf: But then if you host it on AS, how do you deal with the lifecycle?
```
